1. Hepatology. 2018 Aug;68(2):496-514. doi: 10.1002/hep.29849. Epub 2018 May 21. DEP domain-containing mTOR-interacting protein suppresses lipogenesis and ameliorates hepatic steatosis and acute-on-chronic liver injury in alcoholic liver disease. Chen H(1)(2), Shen F(1)(2)(3), Sherban A(4), Nocon A(4), Li Y(4)(5), Wang H(6), Xu MJ(6), Rui X(4), Han J(4), Jiang B(4), Lee D(1)(2), Li N(1)(2)(7), Keyhani-Nejad F(1)(2), Fan JG(3), Liu F(2), Kamat A(8), Musi N(2)(8), Guarente L(9), Pacher P(6), Gao B(6), Zang M(1)(2)(8). Author information: (1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health San Antonio, San Antonio, TX. (2)Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, Center for Healthy Aging, University of Texas Health San Antonio, San Antonio, TX. (3)Xin Hua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (4)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA. (5)Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. (6)Laboratory of Liver Diseases, Laboratory of Cardiovascular Physiology and Tissue Injury, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD. (7)Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (8)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX. (9)Department of Biology, Paul F. Glenn Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) is characterized by lipid accumulation and liver injury. However, how chronic alcohol consumption causes hepatic lipid accumulation remains elusive. The present study demonstrates that activation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) plays a causal role in alcoholic steatosis, inflammation, and liver injury. Chronic-plus-binge ethanol feeding led to hyperactivation of mTORC1, as evidenced by increased phosphorylation of mTOR and its downstream kinase S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) in hepatocytes. Aberrant activation of mTORC1 was likely attributed to the defects of the DEP domain-containing mTOR-interacting protein (DEPTOR) and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-dependent deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) in the liver of chronic-plus-binge ethanol-fed mice and in the liver of patients with ALD. Conversely, adenoviral overexpression of hepatic DEPTOR suppressed mTORC1 signaling and ameliorated alcoholic hepatosteatosis, inflammation, and acute-on-chronic liver injury. Mechanistically, the lipid-lowering effect of hepatic DEPTOR was attributable to decreased proteolytic processing, nuclear translocation, and transcriptional activity of the lipogenic transcription factor sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 (SREBP-1). DEPTOR-dependent inhibition of mTORC1 also attenuated alcohol-induced cytoplasmic accumulation of the lipogenic regulator lipin 1 and prevented alcohol-mediated inhibition of fatty acid oxidation. Pharmacological intervention with rapamycin alleviated the ability of alcohol to up-regulate lipogenesis, to down-regulate fatty acid oxidation, and to induce steatogenic phenotypes. Chronic-plus-binge ethanol feeding led to activation of SREBP-1 and lipin 1 through S6K1-dependent and independent mechanisms. Furthermore, hepatocyte-specific deletion of SIRT1 disrupted DEPTOR function, enhanced mTORC1 activity, and exacerbated alcoholic fatty liver, inflammation, and liver injury in mice. CONCLUSION: The dysregulation of SIRT1-DEPTOR-mTORC1 signaling is a critical determinant of ALD pathology; targeting SIRT1 and DEPTOR and selectively inhibiting mTORC1-S6K1 signaling may have therapeutic potential for treating ALD in humans. (Hepatology 2018). © 2018 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. DOI: 10.1002/hep.29849 PMCID: PMC6097912 PMID: 29457836 [Indexed for MEDLINE] Conflict of interest statement: The authors disclose no conflicts of interest.