1. Chem Biol Interact. 2020 Jan 25;316:108929. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2019.108929. Epub 2019 Dec 16. Sodium acetate protects against nicotine-induced excess hepatic lipid in male rats by suppressing xanthine oxidase activity. Dangana EO(1), Omolekulo TE(1), Areola ED(1), Olaniyi KS(1), Soladoye AO(2), Olatunji LA(3). Author information: (1)HOPE Cardiometabolic Research Team & College of Health Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria; Department of Physiology, College of Health Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria. (2)Department of Physiology, College of Health Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria. (3)HOPE Cardiometabolic Research Team & College of Health Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria; Department of Physiology, College of Health Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria. Electronic address: tunjilaw@unilorin.edu.ng. Fatty liver is the hepatic consequence of chronic insulin resistance (IR) and related syndromes. It is mostly accompanied by inflammatory and oxidative molecules. Increased activity of xanthine oxidase (XO) exerts both inflammatory and oxidative effects and has been implicated in metabolic derangements including non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) elicit beneficial metabolic alterations in IR and related syndromes. In the present study, we evaluated the preventive effects of a SCFA, acetate, on nicotine-induced dysmetabolism and fatty liver. Twenty-four male Wistar rats (n = 6/group): vehicle-treatment (p.o.), nicotine-treated (1.0 mg/kg; p.o.), sodium acetate-treated (200 mg/kg; p.o.) and nicotine + sodium acetate-treated groups. The treatments lasted for 8 weeks. IR was estimated by oral glucose tolerance test and homeostatic model assessment of IR. Plasma and hepatic free fatty acid, triglyceride (TG), glutathione peroxidase, adenosine deaminase (ADA), XO and uric acid (UA) were measured. Nicotine exposure resulted in reduced body weight, liver weight, visceral adiposity, glycogen content and glycogen synthase activity. Conversely, exposure to nicotine increased fasting plasma glucose, lactate, IR, plasma and hepatic TG, free fatty acid, TG/HDL-cholesterol ratio, lipid peroxidation, liver function enzymes, plasma and hepatic UA, XO and ADA activities. However, plasma and hepatic glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-dependent antioxidant defense was not affected by nicotine. Concomitant treatment with acetate ameliorated nicotine-induced effects. Taken together, these results indicate that nicotine exposure leads to excess deposition of lipid in the liver by enhancing XO activity. The results also imply that acetate confers hepatoprotection and is accompanied by decreased XO activity. Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2019.108929 PMID: 31857090 [Indexed for MEDLINE] Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.