1. Dev Cell. 2020 Jan 27;52(2):196-209.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.11.012. Epub 2019 Dec 19. Low-Level Saturated Fatty Acid Palmitate Benefits Liver Cells by Boosting Mitochondrial Metabolism via CDK1-SIRT3-CPT2 Cascade. Liu L(1), Xie B(2), Fan M(2), Candas-Green D(2), Jiang JX(3), Wei R(4), Wang Y(5), Chen HW(6), Hu Y(7), Li JJ(8). Author information: (1)Department of Radiation Oncology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; Institute of Liver Diseases, Shuguan Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (5)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA. (7)Institute of Liver Diseases, Shuguan Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China. (8)Department of Radiation Oncology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA. Electronic address: jijli@ucdavis.edu. Saturated fatty acids (SFAs) (the "bad" fat), especially palmitate (PA), in the human diet are blamed for potential health risks such as obesity and cancer because of SFA-induced lipotoxicity. However, epidemiological results demonstrate a latent benefit of SFAs, and it remains elusive whether a certain low level of SFAs is physiologically essential for maintaining cell metabolic hemostasis. Here, we demonstrate that although high-level PA (HPA) indeed induces lipotoxic effects in liver cells, low-level PA (LPA) increases mitochondrial functions and alleviates the injuries induced by HPA or hepatoxic agent carbon tetrachloride (CCl4). LPA treatment in mice enhanced liver mitochondrial activity and reduced CCl4 hepatotoxicity with improved blood levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), and mitochondrial aspartate transaminase (m-AST). LPA-mediated mitochondrial homeostasis is regulated by CDK1-mediated SIRT3 phosphorylation, which in turn deacetylates and dimerizes CPT2 to enhance fatty acid oxidation. Thus, an advantageous effect is suggested by the consumption of LPA that augments mitochondrial metabolic homeostasis via CDK1-SIRT3-CPT2 cascade. Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.11.012 PMCID: PMC6996588 PMID: 31866205 [Indexed for MEDLINE] Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no competing interests.