1. Lipids Health Dis. 2020 May 14;19(1):94. doi: 10.1186/s12944-020-01271-1. Hepatic steatosis induced in C57BL/6 mice by a non-ß oxidizable fatty acid analogue is associated with reduced plasma kynurenine metabolites and a modified hepatic NAD(+)/NADH ratio. Berge RK(1)(2), Cacabelos D(3)(4), Señarís R(4), Nordrehaug JE(3)(5), Nygård O(3)(6)(7), Skorve J(3), Bjørndal B(3). Author information: (1)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. rolf.berge@uib.no. (2)Department of Heart Disease, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. rolf.berge@uib.no. (3)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. (4)Department of Physiology, CIMUS, University of Santiago de Compostela-Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (5)Department of Heart Disease, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway. (6)Department of Heart Disease, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (7)KG Jebsen Centre for Diabetes Research, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. BACKGROUND: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is often associated with obesity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and the metabolic syndrome in addition to mitochondrial dysfunction and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) deficiency. The aim of this study was to investigate how inhibition of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation using the compound tetradecylthiopropionic acid (TTP) would affect hepatic triacylglycerol level and plasma levels of kynurenine (Kyn) metabolites and nicotinamide. METHODS: 12 C57BL/6 mice were fed a control diet, or an intervention diet supplemented with 0.9% (w/w) tetradecylthiopropionic acid for 14 days. Blood and liver samples were collected, enzyme activities and gene expression were analyzed in liver, in addition to fatty acid composition. Metabolites in the tryptophan/kynurenine pathway and total antioxidant status were measured in plasma. RESULTS: Dietary treatment with tetradecylthiopropionic acid for 2 weeks induced fatty liver accompanied by decreased mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation. The liver content of the oxidized form of NAD+ was increased, as well as the ratio of NAD+/NADH, and these changes were associated by increased hepatic mRNA levels of NAD synthetase and nicotinamide mononucleotide adenyltransferase-3. The downstream metabolites of kynurenine were reduced in plasma whereas the plasma nicotinamide content was increased. Some effects on inflammation and oxidative stress was observed in the liver, while the plasma antioxidant capacity was increased. This was accompanied by a reduced plasma ratio of kynurenine/tryptophan. In addition, a significant decrease in the inflammation-related arachidonic fatty acid in liver was observed. CONCLUSION: Fatty liver induced by short-time treatment with tetradecylthiopropionic acid decreased the levels of kynurenine metabolites but increased the plasma levels of NAD+ and nicotinamide. These changes are most likely not associated with increased inflammation and oxidative stress. Most probably the increase of NAD+ and nicotinamide are generated through the Preiss Handler pathway and/or salvage pathway and not through the de novo pathway. The take home message is that non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is associated with the metabolic syndrome in addition to mitochondrial dysfunction and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) deficiency. Inducing fatty liver in mice by inhibition of fatty acid oxidation resulted in a concomitant change in kynurenine metabolites increasing the plasma levels of nicotinamides and the hepatic NAD+/NADH ratio, probably without affecting the de novo pathway of kynurenines. DOI: 10.1186/s12944-020-01271-1 PMCID: PMC7227213 PMID: 32410680 [Indexed for MEDLINE] Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.