1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2021 Jul 1;321(1):E90-E104. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00651.2020. Epub 2021 May 24. β(2)-Adrenergic receptor agonist induced hepatic steatosis in mice: modeling nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in hyperadrenergic states. Shi Y(1), Pizzini J(1), Wang H(2), Das F(1), Abdul Azees PA(1)(2), Ghosh Choudhury G(1), Barnes JL(1), Zang M(3)(4)(5), Weintraub ST(6), Yeh CK(2)(4)(5), Katz MS(1)(5), Kamat A(1)(4)(5). Author information: (1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas. (2)Department of Comprehensive Dentistry, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, Texas. (4)Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas. (5)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, Audie L. Murphy Division, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, Texas. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a spectrum of disorders ranging from hepatic steatosis [excessive accumulation of triglycerides (TG)] to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, which can progress to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. The molecular pathogenesis of steatosis and progression to more severe NAFLD remains unclear. Obesity and aging, two principal risk factors for NAFLD, are associated with a hyperadrenergic state. β-Adrenergic responsiveness in liver increases in animal models of obesity and aging, and in both is linked to increased hepatic expression of β2-adrenergic receptors (β2-ARs). We previously showed that in aging rodents intracellular signaling from elevated hepatic levels of β2-ARs may contribute to liver steatosis. In this study we demonstrate that injection of formoterol, a highly selective β2-AR agonist, to mice acutely results in hepatic TG accumulation. Further, we have sought to define the intrahepatic mechanisms underlying β2-AR mediated steatosis by investigating changes in hepatic expression and cellular localization of enzymes, transcription factors, and coactivators involved in processes of lipid accrual and disposition-and also functional aspects thereof-in livers of formoterol-treated animals. Our results suggest that β2-AR activation by formoterol leads to increased hepatic TG synthesis and de novo lipogenesis, increased but incomplete β-oxidation of fatty acids with accumulation of potentially toxic long-chain acylcarnitine intermediates, and reduced TG secretion-all previously invoked as contributors to fatty liver disease. Experiments are ongoing to determine whether sustained activation of hepatic β2-AR signaling by formoterol might be utilized to model fatty liver changes occurring in hyperadrenergic states of obesity and aging, and thereby identify novel molecular targets for the prevention or treatment of NAFLD.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Results of our study suggest that β2-adrenergic receptor (β2-AR) activation by agonist formoterol leads to increased hepatic TG synthesis and de novo lipogenesis, incomplete β-oxidation of fatty acids with accumulation of long-chain acylcarnitine intermediates, and reduced TG secretion. These findings may, for the first time, implicate a role for β2-AR responsive dysregulation of hepatic lipid metabolism in the pathogenetic processes underlying NAFLD in hyperadrenergic states such as obesity and aging. DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00651.2020 PMCID: PMC8321826 PMID: 34029162 [Indexed for MEDLINE] Conflict of interest statement: Y.S., J.P., H.W., F.D., P.A.A., G.G-C., M.Z., S.T.W., C-K.Y., M.S.K., and A.K. have nothing to disclose. J.L.B. is Chief Science Officer and has equity interests in ProbeTex, Inc.